# GCC - GNU Compiler Collection
- GCC is not just a compiler it is a colllection of toolchains that will help to convert high level lanuguages to binary.
- GCC tool chains include preprocessor, compiler, assembler and linker.
## how to use GCC
* Build a C file using gcc

```bash
# syntax
    gcc filename.c

# output: 
    a.out
# note: a.out is the default name of final executable file from GCC
```
```bash
examples: 

# build a single C file
gcc hex.c

# Build multiple C files simultaneously
gcc hex.c hello.c
```        
## gcc flags
* -o : This option specifies the name of the output file

```bash
eg:
    gcc main.c -o hi
# input = main.c
# output = hi
```
*  -E: This option tells the GCC to run only the preprocessor only.ie, you will get preprocessor output only. By default, if you don’t use -o, the output will be printed to the terminal.

```bash
eg: 
    gcc -E main.c
# input = main.c
# ouput = you will get preprocessed file on terminal
    
    gcc -E main.c -o main.i
# input = main.c
# output = main.i
```
* -c : for creating object files from c file (ie,the  output file of assembler)

```bash
eg:
    gcc -c main.c
# input = main.c
# output = main.o
```
* -save-temps : This flag in gcc tells the compiler to save all intermediate files generated during the compilation process. Normally, GCC deletes these temporary files after compiling.
```bash
eg:
    gcc -save-temps main.c
# input = main.c
# output = main.i, main.s, main.o, a.out
```
* -I : This flag in gcc is used to specify an additional directory for the compiler to search for header files. When you use #include in your code, GCC looks in standard directories (like /usr/include) by default, but with -I, you can tell GCC to also look in other directories you specify.

```bash
eg:
    gcc -I path/to/directory main.c
````
* -L : used to specify an additional directory for the compiler to search for linker scripts (usefull in case of cross compilation)

```bash
eg:
    gcc -L path/to/directory main.c
```
* -g : this flag is used to include debugging information in the executable files generated by the toolchain. This information helps debuggers, like GDB (GNU Debugger), provide more detailed insights during the debugging process.
```bash
eg: 
    gcc -g main.c

# note: You can use different levels of debugging information with the -g flag:
* -g: Produces default debugging information.
* -g1: Minimal debugging information (suitable for larger projects where full debugging info is not necessary).
* -g2: Default debugging information (similar to just -g).
* -g3: Includes extra information such as macro definitions.
```
* -O < optimization_level > : this flag tells the gcc to do for optimization in our code (capital O,not zero).by default gcc do not do optimization.we can control the level of optimization by changing optimization level.

```bash
eg:
    * gcc -O0 main.c # no optimization (default)
    * gcc -O1 main.c # basic optimization
    * gcc -O2 main.c # more optimizations
    * gcc -O3 main.c # aggressive optimizations
    * gcc -Os main.c # optimize for size
    * gcc -Ofast main.c # fast optimizations, may violate strict standards
# note: optimization make debugging difficult